Computerland Corp. reported a loss of $13.9 million for its third quarter ended June 30, mainly because of problems in its Australian operations and unrest in China.
The company was hurt earlier in the year by fraud in its Hong Kong office.
Computerland is a closely held chain of computer retail outlets, most of which are owned by franchise holders. Computerland franchises sell more computers than any other retailer, with more than $1.9 billion in sales for the nine months ended June 30. Because it issued publicly traded debt last spring, the concern now has to file disclosures with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Its first such report, released yesterday, portrays a company with surging sales but some control problems. Computerland has agreed to take over its Australian operation, a joint venture between it and an ex-franchise holder, because of losses discovered by a company audit. B. Wade Monroe, Computerland's chief financial officer, said the former franchise holder operated the 21 Australian outlets ``with an absence of elementary business sense,'' allowing inventory to almost disappear and spending millions of dollars on ill-fated advertising campaigns and promotions.
Furthermore, the financial reports sent back to headquarters by the former franchise holder masked the extent of the problem, Mr. Monroe said. Computerland had a loss of $14.3 million in the quarter from its Australia operations and expects to report another loss in the current quarter. For the nine months, the Australian losses totaled $15.7 million.
For the year-earlier quarter, Computerland had a loss of $2.2 million, including a $5.3 million loss from discontinued operations.
For the nine months, Computerland's losses totaled $5.1 million. For the year-earlier nine months, the company earned $6.5 million. There weren't any per-share earnings because of preferred dividend requirements. Computerland got stung by the upheaval in China. Mr. Monroe said two trading companies that owed Computerland millions of dollars appear to have been closed down following the Chinese army's attacks against student protesters last summer in Beijing. One of the companies, which Mr. Monroe said had been run by a pro-student businessman who has since fled the country, was seized by the government. Mr. Monroe said Computerland hasn't been able even to contact the other trading company. As a result, Computerland took a $2.8 million charge in the latest quarter.
Computerland also was nicked last spring by an export scam run by employees in its Hong Kong office, Mr. Monroe said. In an apparent effort to pump up sales figures, the employees deliberately evaded Hong Kong law by shipping computers into China without export licenses, Mr. Monroe said. That cost Computerland $900,000 in the second quarter ended March 31.
Mr. Monroe said Computerland fired the employees and later closed its Hong Kong office, ended its Chinese operations and instituted rigorous controls in Australia.
The SEC filing showed that Computerland had a profit of $14.8 million from its other operations, mainly those in the U.S. and Europe.
Total retail sales for the quarter from all Computerland franchises rose 28% to $639.7 million from $500.9 million, reflecting booming demand for business computers, Computerland said. For the nine months, sales rose 27% to $1.9 billion. Because Computerland only recognizes as revenue the royalties paid it by franchise holders and sales from the handful of stores it owns outright, the company's revenue for the quarter as reported in the filing totaled $25.9 million, down from $27.2 million. For the nine months, revenue rose from $92.9 million to $80.6 million.
