Top executives at Banca Nazionale del Lavoro's Rome headquarters routinely referred clients wishing to do business with Iraq to the bank's Atlanta branch because of the branch's expertise in handling Iraqi credits, sources at the Italian state-owned bank said.
They added that the central bank of Iraq also had a cash collateral deposit of several tens of millions of dollars with BNL in Italy. It is possible that this cash came from loans extended by the bank's Atlanta branch, the sources said.
But the BNL sources yesterday insisted that the head office was aware of only a small portion of the credits to Iraq made by Atlanta. These totaled only in the tens of millions of dollars, and involved approved transactions by well-known U.S. and Italian companies, the sources said. They denied that any sales of weapons were involved.
The disclosures come amid growing speculation in Italy that someone in the Rome headquarters of BNL, Italy's biggest bank, was aware that the bank's Atlanta branch was lending massive amounts of money to Iraq and either approved the transactions or at least failed to stop them.
BNL so far has pinned the blame for the unauthorized lending, which totals around $3 billion -- not all of it yet disbursed -- on the Atlanta branch's manager, 40-year-old Christopher Drogoul.
In a stormy debate in Italy's Chamber of Deputies yesterday, opposition members of parliament blasted the government for failing to provide a full account of the affair, and demanded a parliamentary inquiry. Even members of the ruling five-party coalition were dissatisfied with official explanations offered so far. ``The attempts to write off the affair by blaming a single functionary have failed,'' declared Gerolamo Pellicano, a deputy from the Republican Party. In Atlanta, seven BNL officers and two other employees of the branch were suspended yesterday, pending the findings of audits of the branch, one of the suspended employees said. BNL officials from Italy have taken over operations at the branch. Mr. Drogoul was suspended in August.
Meanwhile, Treasury Minister Guido Carli reiterated in a meeting before the Chamber of Deputies that the techniques used to hide the unauthorized operations in Atlanta ``left traces in the official accounts of the bank.''
So far, he said, ``no specific references to arms traffic have emerged'' in BNL Atlanta's documents. ``At the moment, it's not possible to understand whether the irregular dealings between BNL Atlanta and Iraq were part of a wider scheme,'' he said.
Despite persistent reports that a list of companies suspected of illegal arms trading has been handed over to investigators, Mr. Carli said that he was unable to name the companies that had received financing for exports to Iraq from BNL Atlanta because the branch's information is too ``fragmentary.''
Investigations are under way by Bank of Italy inspectors, the Rome public prosecutor and a Venice magistrate who is studying arms traffic to Iran allegedly financed by BNL. Mr. Carli promised to keep Parliament informed on their progress.
