Wendy's International Inc.'s ``Where's the beef?'' ads made a mint for the hamburger chain and turned Clara Peller into a stentorian, crotchety cult hero. But since the 1984 campaign, Wendy's has spun its wheels with an ill-fated omelette, slipshod stores and forgettable ads.
Now the company has turned to another improbable television personality: R. David Thomas, who founded Wendy's 20 years ago. The round-faced, bespectacled Mr. Thomas hopes his folksy on-air demeanor will improve the company's image.
Lee Iacocca, he's not. ``I'm a hamburger cook, not a celebrity,'' says the 57-year-old Mr. Thomas. ``I'm only trying to sell hamburgers, and if I don't, I'm history.''
Selling hamburgers is tough these days for fast-food restaurants. The $60-billion-a-year industry expects little growth this year, and heavy discounting to boost market share is cutting profits. Small drive-through hamburger stands have saturated some markets, while beef consumption in general is falling.
Wendy's desperately needs to increase customer traffic for its 1,159 company-operated restaurants and 2,609 franchisees. In the first half of this year, Wendy's operating profit fell 29% to $10.1 million, largely because of higher costs related to couponing, local advertising and chicken prices.
Wendy's, based in Dublin, Ohio, has seen its market share fall to 4.8% last year from 5.5% in 1984. Competition with the three leading hamburger chains -- Mcdonald's Corp., Grand Metropolitan PLC's Burger King and Imasco Ltd.'s Hardee's -- is expected to intensify.
Burger King in May switched advertising agencies, dropping N W Ayer and splitting its $215 million account equally between D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles and Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising. The first ads are expected to appear this fall. London-based Grand Met, which acquired Burger King last year, is expected to heavily promote the chain.
That will put added pressure on Wendy's, which has sunk most of its $50 million television advertising budget for 1989 into the David Thomas commercials, produced by Backer Spielvogel Bates. Trade publications, such as Advertising Age, have panned the ads, saying that Mr. Thomas is stiff and awkward, but polls conducted in July by the Gallup Organization show that the ads have increased consumer awareness. Wendy's hasn't released sales figures since the campaign went into full swing in June.
Wendy's still appears to be searching for the right TV ad formula. James W. Near, Wendy's president and chief executive officer, says the ads with Mr. Thomas are a ``bridge until we find out what we want to do with our marketing.'' The company also plans to run ads featuring Mr. Thomas's daughter, Wendy, for whom the chain was named. (Wendy, now 28 years old, and her husband operate a golf course in Columbia, S.C.)
Mr. Near acknowledges that Wendy's has had trouble forging a consistent, strong identity. Unlike Mcdonald's, whose ads always include the same type of happy jingles, family images and golden arches, Wendy's hasn't been able latch on to lasting slogans or motifs. Further, its expanded menu of salads, chicken sandwiches and small buffets with Mexican food and pasta may have detracted from what Wendy's says is its strong suit -- high-quality hamburgers. An omelette introduced in 1985 flopped -- partly because customers couldn't eat it in the car -- and was discontinued by most stores.
Wendy's problems have also stemmed from neglecting store operations during the years of runaway growth. During much of the 1980s, Wendy's added hundreds of stores each year, and customers came by droves after the ``Where's the beef'' campaign. They found the beef, but they also found poor service, messy tables and inconsistent quality.
Wendy's ``didn't watch the stores as carefully as they should have been, and some credibility was lost between the franchisee and the company,'' says Mr. Near, a former Wendy's franchise owner.
Mr. Near's effort to turn Wendy's around began when he joined the company as chief operating officer in 1986. He cut 500 positions, or about one-third of the staff. Last year Wendy's sold or closed 26 more stores than it opened. Mr. Near, 51, has also introduced a smaller, less expensive hamburger and several 99-cent items, such as junior bacon cheeseburgers.
Wendy's also is seeking to ensure that bathrooms are mopped and employees smile. This month it is offering cash incentives to the operators of the best-looking restaurants, and the manager of the cleanest Wendy's gets a Corvette.
