A surge in truck sales by [General Motors Corp. in sales of North American-built vehicles in mid-September.
But auto makers still face a sales environment that gives them and their dealers the jitters. Ford Motor Co. announced late yesterday that, beginning next week, it's closing a truck plant in Kentucky for one week and a car-assembly plant in Ohio for two weeks. The company cited ``a shortage of dealer orders.''
Consumers bought 342,492 domestic-made vehicles in the period ended Sept. 20, compared with 270,299 a year earlier. There were nine selling days in the latest period compared with eight a year ago, so based on the daily rate the sales increase was 12.6%.
Sales of North American-made cars alone, excluding trucks, rose to 211,966 vehicles from 170,988 in the like 10-day, year-ago period. That produced a strong annual selling rate of 8.4 million cars, according to a Commerce Department formula.
The overall sales increase was led by General Motors trucks, which shot up 45% to 62,064 vehicles in mid-September. Bargain-hunting buyers responded to particularly generous incentives that included cash rebates to customers and cash incentives to dealers who met sales quotas. In addition, on the Chevy S-10 pickup, GM also made cash awards to dealership sales personnel.
``You're getting the shrewd buyers,'' said R.E. Cochran, whose family owns two dealerships in the Pittsburgh area. ``You really have the people that are out for every nickel and dime.'' GM's domestic car sales also registered a healthy 11.2% increase, helped by customer rebates and the extra incentive of cash awards to dealers who met sales targets. Ford Motor, which offered customer rebates but no special cash incentives to dealers, posted a 2.6% gain in domestic cars and a 4.5% gain in domestically made trucks.
Ford's disclosure that it will close its truck plant in Louisville, Ky., for one week seems to indicate that the company is losing ground in its truck-sales battle with GM's Chevrolet division. Chevy traditionally has led the nation in pickup truck sales, but Ford has taken over top spot in the past three years.
Ford's truck sales have been hurt by a continuing shortage of trucks with automatic transmissions. Ford has recently expanded its capacity to build automatic transmissions, and plans to put more of them in its 1990 model pickups.
Meanwhile, Ford's closure of the Lorain, Ohio, car-assembly plant reflects slow sales of the Thunderbird and Cougar coupes built there. The Thunderbird SC won Motor Trend magazine's coveted car of the year award, but the car's sales have proved disappointing. The two plant closedowns together will idle 4,700 employees.
Chrysler Corp.'s domestic car sales increased 2.1%, while its mid-September domestic truck sales rose a mere 0.7%.
Honda Motor Co.'s sales of domestically built cars rose 64.7% from a year earlier. Honda dealers also are slashing prices to move out 1989-model automobiles. Dan Klawitter, sales manager of Gardena Honda Automobiles in Gardena, Calif., said a 1989 Honda Accord LX car with a standard transmission is selling for about $12,500, $700 to $800 cheaper than its price a few months earlier.
Auto makers continue to worry that the brisk sales in the waning weeks of the 1989 model year will give way to a slump after the 1990 model year begins next week. GM and Chrysler have taken the unusual move of putting incentives on their 1990 models before they officially go on sale.
a-Totals include only vehicle sales reported in the period.
b-Percent  change greater than 999%
c-Domestic  car
x-There were nine selling days in the most recent period and eight a year earlier. Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume.
