If there is a ``Gold Coast'' in the Midwest outside Chicago's North Shore, it is Michigan's Oakland County. Encompassing more than 50 bedroom communities north of Detroit, Oakland County has one of the highest per-capita incomes in the Midwest, according to the 1980 U.S. census.
The city of Troy, whose gleaming highrises symbolize the county's rapid economic growth in this decade, recently was named one of the nation's three largest ``boom towns of the 1990s'' by this newspaper. Bloomfield Hills, whose 1980 per-capita income was $37,808, is one of the wealthiest communities in the U.S.
Oakland County has more than private wealth -- it also receives Community Development Block Grant funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Public records show that Oakland County (excluding Pontiac, the county's least prosperous area) has received more than $62 million in HUD block grants since 1975 (about two-thirds -- $40,602,915 -- between 1981 and 1989).
In the current fiscal year, Oakland County (again, excluding Pontiac) received $4,319,313. HUD's block grant program, established to assist the nation's poor, also helps Oakland County's wealthy.
HUD is engulfed in scandal; a series of revelations in recent months has linked agency officials to influence-peddling and the misuse of taxpayer funds, often at the behest of members of Congress. Though it has been overlooked in the scandal, the block grant program is a classic example of HUD's misuse of taxpayer money. Except for the philosophical opposition of a few free-market-oriented think tanks (Heritage, Cato, the Mises Institute), the block grant program has escaped scrutiny.
That should come as little surprise. Any member of Congress who opposes the program risks the ire of local officials receiving block grants back in the district. Reporters and editors have spent more time chasing headlines than critically examining the ``raison d'etre'' of HUD spending.
Block grants differ from HUD's Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) program, established during the Carter administration. Congress has defunded the UDAG program, effective this month, while block grants are still being dispensed to local officials.
Since its creation by President Nixon, the block grant program has been popular among Republicans. GOP Rep. William Broomfield's district includes part of Oakland County. Ending the HUD program, Mr. Broomfield contends, is unrealistic because ``there would be too much opposition at the local level. With this type of program there has been a considerable amount of support for it among local officials.'' A Broomfield aide explains, ``He's being pragmatic. They're tremendously popular with local communities.''
Oakland Township is one of the communities in Mr. Broomfield's district where block grants have proved popular. Hidden within HUD's $3 billion block-grant program is a $14,775 block grant to Oakland Township for ``Downtown Revitalization.'' Trouble is, there is no downtown in Oakland Township, one of the county's newest bedroom communities. ``Downtown'' is a parking lot at the Oakland Township hall.
Records show the HUD grant is to ``purchase and improve'' the lot, located in a section known as Goodison. Goodison is so small that it does not even have a traffic light.
``It {Goodison} is strange because it really doesn't exist,'' said Joan Buser, Oakland Township's Republican supervisor. ``If you had to define Goodison, what would you call it? It's not a village. It's not a city. It's not a street. It's an enigma.''
Goodison may be an enigma, but HUD has also given Oakland Township an $11,810 block grant to ``reduce interest charges for business owners in the'Goodison  Historical Area''' and a $13,543 grant to construct ``barrier free improvements'' at the township hall, records show.
HUD block grant funds pay for more than government parking lots and commercial revitalization in the county. Overall, one in every eight dollars received by Oakland County communities under the block grant program -- $1 million -- is spent on administration, records show.
Many of the projects funded by HUD block grants in the county could be paid for at the local level through millages. Boom-city Troy will receive $161,649 in block grants in the current fiscal year for ``water system and street improvements.'' Mayor Richard Doyle says abolishing the block grant program ``wouldn't have a major impact,'' although it does not make sense for the city to turn down HUD funds while they are available.
``A growth area has the ability to tax itself and finance the solution to some of those problems,'' says Rep. Bob Carr, a Democrat whose district includes part of the county.
Rep. Carr favors tightening eligibility requirements for the program. He supports continued funding for depressed areas such as Pontiac, which is in his district. ``For an area of economic decline and a dwindling tax base, the chances of digging yourself out of a hole are slim or none,'' Mr. Carr said. Rep. Broomfield supports funding for upscale communities in his district and Pontiac: ``Pontiac is a community in need of assistance.'' During a July 10 speech in Detroit, HUD Secretary Jack Kemp said, ``There are a lot of {HUD} programs that need to be reformed -- every one. We should have the courage to close programs that don't work.''
Mr. Kemp should start with HUD's block grant program, which enriches wealthy areas at the poor's expense.
Mr. Kaza, an Oakland County resident, is vice president for policy research at the Makinac Center, of Midland, Mich.
